or gaza's future is due to be discussed
by the Palestinian Authority president
here in Qatar Mahmud Abbas is flying to
Doha to meet the Amir shik Taman bin
hammad Alani well Elam Pape is an
Israeli historian and author of the
ethnic cleansing of Palestine he's
joining us here in our Doha Studio very
good to have you with us so I want to
ask you first of all about this visit uh
by Mahmud abas right from the start the
Israeli government backed by the US has
said that in order for the Palestinian
authority to have to have any role in
the future of Gaza then it has to be
rejuvenated how difficult does that make
it for Mahmud Abbas when he is making an
attempt to be part of the negotiating
process it would be very difficult for
him to be relevant because in the eyes
of the Israeli government for quite a
while he's not relevant the only
function that he seems to serve as far
as the Israeli government is concerned
is some sort of security coordination to
keep the lid on the uh out potential
Uprising in in the West Bank I don't
think the Israelis are at all interested
in Consulting him about the day after in
Gaza I think there's more interest in
the United States I think Washington is
more keen to have the PA as part of the
post-war if you want Arrangement uh but
I if I may say so myself I think it
would be a terrible mistake for the PA
to be part of it uh as this is going to
be seen by so many Palestinians as
collaborating with the destruction of
Gaza and the Israeli visions of the
post-war Gaza which is definitely very
very opposite for what most Palestinians
would have liked I I want to ask you
about the credibility element of it
because one could perhaps understand
that the the view of Palestinians in
Gaza but would one would also Imagine
That Palestinians in the West Bank
who've been living under the Palestinian
for a long time would have uh a
particularly jaus view because the
credibility of the Palestinian Authority
has not been great over the last several
years not not very much I would say even
more the legitimacy not just the
credibility and uh the longer the
Israeli operations continue and they
will continue unfortunately for quite a
while the more difficult it would be for
people in the West Bank to remain
relatively I say relatively passive
because quite a few young Palestinian
factions have been trying to join the
resistance in Gaza uh but of course it's
very difficult because the Israelis are
are using very oppressive Ive methods in
Gaza so I think yes I think that if we
already know that the credibility was
undermined it's going to be further
undermined if if the PA would be seen to
be part of a coalition that gives a
green light to Israel to implement its
ideas for how to rule Gaza uh in the end
of the war and the war is not very near
ending we should take this into account
so we really don't see any role for the
PA in the next 15 months because this is
more or less the period in which the
fighting will continue uh and I don't
think there will be any substantial
negotiations anyway about the day after
MH okay I want to I want to get your
opinion with regard to that fighting
that you're talking about as we know and
Benjamin Netanyahu has instructed the
Israeli military in order to carry out
put plans together for an operation to
to move into Rafa that has prompted a
significant response very very critical
response from the US the UK various
supporters of isra including of course
Aid agencies as well is there an
indication do you think that this is the
point at which the support that the
Netanyahu government has been receiving
up to now is starting to fracture it's
starting to back away is this a sign
that people are saying No this pushing
everybody pushing 1.4 million million
Palestinians into a corner of Gaza in
Rafa is simply too far I I wish I would
be a bearer of good news but I I'm
afraid that history teaches us that
strong American language of condemnation
very rarely is supported by actions and
the Israelis have a way of kind of
taming or at least allegedly taming
their actions uh creating the impression
that this is not really a military
operation it's a limited operation they
will find a way that would satisfy an
American Administration on election year
uh in a way that unfortunately as far as
the Palestinians in Rafa are concerned
would be quite meaningless the same I
think is true about the EU and the
European governments I think that they
are very easily uh induced by Israel to
take a strong position in words but not
to translate them into actions that
could have bring an end to the fighting
so I think that the Israeli Army will
attack Rafa uh I don't think that the
Israeli plans for how to deal with the
refugees are going easily to materialize
uh we hope and we need a strong
International re action now because once
the Israeli operation will begin it will
be even more difficult to stop them mhm
the fact that Benjamin Netanyahu went
public and said that he had instructed
the military to make this plan for a
push on Rafa at this particular time
when there are negotiations albeit
fairly fragmented we don't have a lot of
details um about working towards some
sort of timeline towards the ceasefire
is there a sense that there that the
timing of this anoun an m is in some way
connected to the negotiations and the to
put perhaps pressure on the negotiators
perhaps on Hamas itself to try to move
along with some sort of solution I think
netan is recently talking mainly to his
electoral base more than to anyone else
and his electoral base is made of people
who care little about those who've been
captured in Gaza they want to see the
continuation of the military actions
they want to see a stop for
international Aid to Gaza so when he
talks in Hebrew uh to the Israeli public
he talks to his base when he talks to
the American Media he tries to sound a
bit more pragmatic a bit more inclusive
but I don't think that we should take
these uh uh kind of statements by nany
as part of an indication of a policy
this is an attempt to from the very
beginning to use the military operation
to save his skin because uh everything
Netanyahu has done from the of October
until today from his perspective is
calculated to make sure that he's not
going to lose his grip on the government
because of all the other problems that
he faces so his decision eventually to
order the Army to go to Rafa is not out
of a military consideration or even
strategic one it is one that he thinks
that his base would like to hear would
it really how would this translate into
orders practical orders to the Army it's
difficult to to say but I wouldn't
portray the Israeli Army as a doish
institution that is hesitant to attack
RAF so I think we still need the
regional and International Community to
take seriously the possibility that the
catastrophe that we have seen in Gaza is
going to be far worse when Israel uh
Begins the attack on Rafa and they have
the intention of doing it unless they
will be stopped from the outside yeah I
want to take this slightly wider because
we we have about a minute left an
Egyptian official has been quoted as
saying that any attempt to relocate
Palestinians into Egypt would simply
collapse any sort of agreement between
uh security agreement between Egypt and
Israel is this a risk that actually
Israel is in a position to take given
the the level of control that it relies
on from from Egypt over the border with
the Sinai desert it's a risk Israelis
will take I think they understand that
the Egyptians are not going to open the
border and let in the refugees they
still hope they will under the pressure
uh but I think there is a plan B for the
Israelis that it doesn't happen and the
fact that this would you know uh uh
result in a huge human catastrophe is
not something that inhibits the Israelis
from implementing uh that program the
mood in Israel and that's the mood
Netanyahu is relating to is vindicative
still very vindicative dehumanizes the
Palestinians very little compassion for
the Palestinian suffering and therefore
the domestic scene in Israel has no
problem with a wide operation in Rafa
whatever the human consequences of that
operation will be Ellen Poe we
appreciate you giving us the benefit of
your expertise in this thank you very
much indeed for your time thank you very
much for having me thank you